---
title:
  "A third wave of autocratization is here: what is new about it? (Lührmann &
  Lindberg, 2019)"
description: Gradual and legally disguised erosion of democractic institutions
tags:
  - paper
  - democracy
  - autocratization
---

The system seems to require more information. Please provide additional data for
a more accurate response.

## Two key issues

1.  Contemporary democracies tend towards gradual and legally disguised erosion
    rather than sudden democratic breakdown (e.g. through a coup). While
    scholars agree that this seems to be the case, we lack the tools for
    properly understanding this kind of _gradual change_ (maybe see
    [[historical-institutionalism|my concept note on historical insitutionalism]])
2.  There is disagreement about how strong this current wave of autocratization
    is. While some compare it to the 1930s, others suggest the world has become
    more democratic, developed and emancipated than ever before.

## The concept of autocratization

_Autocratization_ is a matter of degree and can occur both in democracies and
autocracies. It is _democratization_ in reverse and describes "any move away
from [full] democracy" [@luhrmann2019, 1099]. It can be decomposed into the
following phases:

![[2020-05-06_12-42-18_screenshot.png]]

## The third wave is real and endangers democracies

"Huntington conspicuously identiﬁed three waves of democratization and two waves
of reversals" [@luhrmann2019, 1102].

An _autocratization wave_ is defined as "the time period during which the number
of countries undergoing democratization declines while at the same time
autocratization affects more and more countries" [@luhrmann2019, 1102].

![[2020-05-06_13-12-27_screenshot.png]]

A key characteristic of the third wave stands out: Almost all autocratizing
countries are democracies - and not autocracies as during the first two waves.
What is unsettling about this distinction of the current autocratization wave is
that, historically, "very few autocratization episodes starting in democracies
have been stopped short of turning countries into autocracies."
([Lührmann and Lindberg 2019, 1108](#orgd9bf005)).

## The third wave has a legal facade

While the first and second waves of autocratization were dominated by "classic"
tactics (e.g. _military coup_ <code>[39%]</code>, _foreign invasion_
<code>[29%]</code> and _autogolpes_), the third wave is chiefly driven by
_democratic erosion_ <code>[70%]</code>, i.e. a tactic used by incumbents where
they first access legal power and then gradually, but substantially, undermine
democratic norms _without_ actually abolishing the key democratic institutions
such as the parliament.

![[2020-05-06_13-23-32_screenshot.png]]

## The third wave is gradual

In this third wave of autocratization, the _autocratization rate_, i.e. a
measure of how fast democratic traits decline, is much lower than in previous
waves:

![[2020-05-06_13-32-07_screenshot.png]]

## Bibliography

[^ref]
