---
title: Contract with myself
---

I like the idea of having a signed contract with myself. I review this contract
quarterly. This is the current version. I keep around a printed-out, signed
version of this.

## Professional life

I, Linus Sehn, will do everything in my power to get better at something hard
every day. My full attention is on the task at hand. I am indistractable because
I enjoy focus. Focus enables excellence and I want to be excellent. My day
revolves around undistracted work.

I listen at least twice as much as I speak. I seek to understand first, being
understood comes second.

I welcome any criticism, no matter how it is presented or how bad it is. If I
feel offended, that is just my ego. I know I can overcome the feeling and
continue listening attentively.

Attaining mastery in anything that is worth it will be hard and, in the process,
I will doubt that I will ever get there. I don't listen to that and continue
practicing. I long for the pain of not understanding something, for it enables
the joy of finally getting it. If I fail, I try again. I will not let my ego get
in the way of pursuing mastery.

## Social life

I will do everything in my power to be **useful** to those who I care about. I
want to connect with new people and create community wherever I can. Life is
fragile and can end anytime, so I should get to it. Fear is the mind-killer and
will never stop me from communicating honestly and respectfully with others. We
all struggle, no matter how beautiful and intelligent we seem.

I am a reflection of the people that I spend most of my time with. I make sure
these people are loving and smart as I want to be loving and smart. I won't ever
let friendships die out of laziness but I\'m not afraid to let people go who
cross a boundary or drag others down. Holding eye contact creates a feeling of
intense connection. I like doing it.

I will take any rejection of my presence or my ideas as a valuable lesson,
recalibrate and continue my journey. I will do something I am afraid of every
day. Giving up or pitying myself is not an option for me.
