---
title: Normalisation
description: Where the notion of something being 'normal' comes from and what types of 'normalisation' Foucault conceptualised
tags:
  - foucault
  - surveillance
---

## Normality and Normalisation

In its earliest use, the word _normal_ meant "perpendicular; forming a right
angle" like something _normālis_ ("made according to a carpenter's square"). In
Late Latin, however, _normālis_ had come to mean "according to a rule". This is
where the modern English interpretation of the word, established towards the end
of the 19th century, originates from, and what explains the word's usage to
denote social standards. For example, heterosexuality in the early 20th century
was _normal_ [@harper2021].

The notion that a thing can be _normal_ is intrinsically tied to the _technics_
of the modern bureaucratic state. Here, I am referring specifically to a concept
used by Lewis Mumford to refer to the interplay of the social and the and
technological or mechanical realms of human innovation. In _Technics and
Civilization_, he writes: "To understand the dominating role played by technics
in modern civilization, one must explore in detail the preliminary period of
ideological and social preparation. Not merely must one explain the existence of
the new mechanical instruments: one must explain the culture that was ready to
use them and profit by them so extensively." [@mumford1934, p. 4]

This is reflected in the word used to describe the discipline in which normality
takes centre stage: _Statistics_. It is no accident that the words _state_ to
denote a political entity and the word _statistics_ share see same root, see
@foucault1975 [p. 101]. It is this field which assumes that the characteristics
of human bodies, the parameters of its experience or features of entire
populations can be meaningfully measured and compared against each other. The
final aim of this exercise is the construction of an [[ideology]] of
_purification_ that classifies human bodies, experience and collectives into
normal and abnormal, governed and not (yet) governed, pure and impure. On the
issue of normalisation as purification and its relationship to what Foucault
calls "state racism", see especially _Society Must Be Defended_ where Foucault
says: "We see the appearance of a State racism: a racism that society will
direct against itself, against its own elements and its own products. This is
the internal racism of permanent purification, and it will become [in the early
19th century] one of the basic dimensions of social normalization."
[@foucault2003]. This ideology is so deeply entrenched in modern discourse that
its removal from the discourse would render much of it unintelligible and
meaningless [@link1997].

In its more general sense _normalisation_ refers to the "processes that
construct experiences and capacities of some social segments into standards
against which all are measured, and some found wanting or deviant" [@young2006].
In the discussion of these processes and their modes of operation, Michel
Foucault's work is of paramount importance.

Foucault distinguishes between two types of normalisation. The first being what
he later called _normation_ and the second being _normalisation_ proper. Their
difference lies primarily in their target object. While disciplinary "normation"
as analysed in _Discipline and Punish_ [@foucault1975] targets the individual
body, normalisation, on the other hand, as analysed in the lecture series
_Security, Territory & Population_ targets entire populations. This is confusing
because in _Discipline and Punish_, Foucault still refers to "normation" as
"normalisation" as his refined understanding of the latter was not developed
until his lecture series on gouvernmentality in 1975.

Let me treat each of those notions in turn:

First, in _Discipline and Punish_, Foucault describes normalising disciplinary
practices or normation as the set of techniques which seek to identify and then
homogenise (with minimal effort) any measurable deviation of bodies from a norm.
The discursive construction of such a norm only becomes possible through close
surveillance of individuals such that their individual characteristics can
become subject to measurement, classification and, finally, correction. Here, it
is important to realise, contrary to popular understanding, that in order to
sustain disciplinary power through normation, the existence of the abnormal or
the deviant is essential in that it renders the processes of bodily normation
meaningful thus justifying its continued operation. In that sense, normation
creates the mechanisms for its own expansion, the natural endpoint of which can
be described as society in which every body and almost everything else is
understood as either being normal or deviant from a norm in some measurable
degree. In that expansion, normation often creates the need to invent new
deviant categories: the homosexual, the person who went _dark_, i.e. seized to
communicate in way that is trivial to surveil, or the person who refuses to wear
a face mask in public. Whenever the pathologization of these categories is
contested, it is important to consider two things in one's appraisal of such a
contestation: The first is the alleviation of human suffering. Obviously, the
assertion of homosexuality as non-deviant has had an unimaginably positive
impact on the lives of many. Quite the opposite is the case when the norm of
wearing of face masks during a global pandemic is contested. Importantly,
however, both of these contestations are similar in one important respect. They
do not challenge normation _per se_, but only quite specific claims about what
exactly is normal and what deviant. In that sense, they remain locked within a
discourse that cannot do without notions like normality and abnormality.

The second form is what Foucault later, more precisely in the third lecture of
the series _Security, Territory & Population_, called normalisation "in the
strict sense" [@foucault2009, 63]. It differs from disciplinary normation in
that it is applied to populations as whole and not individual bodies. Foucault
uses the governmental response to epidemics in the 18th and 19th century to
explain the divergence of normalisation from the disciplinary normation
discussed above. While in the disciplines, a norm is predefined and normation
then operates to achieve fixed objectives such as how to hold the rifle and who
to have sex with, the operation of normalisation now consists in "establishing
an interplay between these different distributions of normality and (in) acting
to bring the most unfavorable in line with the more favorable" [@foucault2009,
p. 63]. Imagine different states within a country. Suppose each of these states
has different rates at which people succumb to COVID-19, thus creating different
normalities. Then these different normalities are compared against each other to
construct a temporary norm of what is demmed most desirable for the overall
population. Finally, as Ladelle McWhorter summarises it succintly in her
contribution to the _Cambridge Foucault Lexicon_: "These population-enhancement
techniques do not discipline individual bodies to fixed norms; rather, by
changing the conditions of life of a population, they cause changes in the norms
themselves." [@lawlor2014]

## Bibliography
